More recently, in Ohio,
first of all, during the Vietnam War, we were
always in there, but we were always arguing
electoral politics, and we were always combining
the fight for the right to dissent along with the
fight against the Vietnam War. The conclusion of
all those things, I just had breakfast two
mornings ago with Sid Pack. Dr. Sid Pack was one of
the organizers of the big mobilization against
the Vietnam War in Washington. I'd known him when
he was at Milwaukee Downer College and organized
the
Committee of 100 in Milwaukee against UI. Then the
peace came and Sid leaves He's a professor of
sociology at Clark College somewhere
in Massachusetts. Worcester, I think.
Worcester, right. So we're seeing each other for
the first time in fifteen years. We're talking
about this whole change. We never lost track of
each other. It's just that he's one case where we
never really got him to keep the question of
dissent upper-most of his mind, and it doesn't
relate to the peace movement. Sid is just
recovering from a horrible violation of his
academic freedom rights from a student that
accused him of sexual harassment at Clark
College. He's just fought two years, he's
$100,000 in debt, trying to fight back to get his
tenured position again, having won, and the
student totally discredited, and the faculty
leader that tried to fire Sid committing suicide.
Horrible thing. My goodness. Anyway, Sid is now
back, finally. But it was his own little lesson on
civil liberties, I think, partly involved. I want
to get you to the classical example. The best
coalition building between all the movements of
the 60s and 70s, and I think should be even now, is
the American Friends Service Committee in
Northeastern Ohio. The guy out there, John
Looney, used to be a business person. How do you
spell his last name? L-O-O-N-E-Y. He's the
Northeastern Ohio director of the American
Friends Service Committee. Four years ago, as the
Reagan dangers for peace developed, He began a
series of three conferences in Cleveland, Akron,
Youngstown, called Guns or Butter? One, Guns or
Butter? Two, Guns or Butter? Three. Obvious
expression of, you know, that issue of the, do we
put our money into feeding people or into war?
At each of these conferences, John Looney invited
me to speak on the right to dissent, the right to
dissent for peace. The classical example was two
years ago at Trinity Cathedral in downtown
Cleveland, a beautiful Gothic Episcopalian
cathedral where the main thing held, among the
other things that the AFSC and Looney did, is they
recognized that people don't drive 35 miles for a
meeting. So each of these conferences were held
simultaneously in Youngstown, Akron, and
Cleveland, three separate conferences, and the
speakers rotated. You'd speak in the morning in
Youngstown, noon in Akron, the evening at
Cleveland. So I'm speaking with Julian Bond and
Marian Anderson at the beautiful, jam-packed
cathedral, Episcopal Church, Trinity Cathedral
in Cleveland. Marian Anderson from Flint,
Michigan, I think, had spoken on the economic cost
of nuclear war. She's the authority. She
presented factual data showing that for every
nuclear warhead built, the same amount of money
put into domestic work could have produced 5,000
new domestic jobs in Northeastern Ohio. Very
telling argument there. Twelve, fifteen percent
unemployment there. Then Julian spoke, and his
argument was that for every dollar we pay in taxes,
that fifty-seven cents on the dollar goes to pay
for past or future wars. I was to be the third
speaker on the right of dissent for peace. As I am
about, Julia's is down, I'm walking up this
marble, it's a huge cathedral, a big marble podium
that you, up where the priest stands to speak. Huge
thing. I'm up there. A woman at the far end of the
cathedral stands up, no microphones, no nothing,
and just hollers out, top of her voice, that,
Senator Bond, everybody turns around to see what
it was, she said, after what you and Marian
Anderson have just said, I say, when tax day comes,
let none of us pay 57 cents on a dollar for taxes, you
know, for the war. And then, the lady, by the way,
was a stereotype of a very middle-class bourgeois
lady. She was tailored, tall, trim, flowery hat,
and the accent, her accent was just the stereotype
of what I think of as a high, high, high
Episcopalian, the nearest thing there is to God,
you know. Well, Julian, this woman then said, are
you with me? She turned to the audience and walks up
the aisle, cheering both sides of the nave, just
the church roaring with cheering for her. Julian
Bond finally gets the floor back. He says, my good
lady, let me steal one on Frank. What you have just
said is an advocacy of criminal conduct. Namely,
don't pay taxes. As a result, the FBI and CIA agents
who are legally in this cathedral tonight due to
President Reagan's new guidelines from the CIA
and the FBI, have taken due note of what you have
said. And
now we'll begin an investigation of you
personally and the Social Action Committee of
your church. Well, it's dead silence. What an
introduction for you. Dead silence. But probably
seemed like thirty seconds, about ten seconds.
What Julian had done, and was carried across, and
this would never have happened without the
coalition building that they knew there in
Cleveland, is that Julian had made the point of the
indivisibility of the struggle for peace with the
struggle for civil liberties. It's a long, long
theory. I best answer questions like that by
telling you. I think that lesson of Wisp in 1962,
and this thing from Julian and Marian Anderson in
1980, are the way we try to work. Always arguing
that peace is indivisible, with civil rights are
indivisible, with tying things together that we
must have one coalition, and no matter what your
social concern may be, you've got to include
within that the civil liberties component. And
that's a place where we have to stop now because